Sri Shirdi Sai Baba was a master of meditation and could enter into deep states of consciousness at will. He was also known to materialize objects out of thin air, including jewelry and sweets. His teachings taught that true happiness comes from helping those in need. He has encouraged people around the country to lead more compassionate and fulfilling lives. If you want to dive into the essence of spirituality, consider the following most important teachings of Sai Baba Shirdi.

Work is worship: Sai of Shirdi taught that work is worship and that no one is above or below another. He recognized that all people are equal and should be regarded with sheer love, loyalty, and respect.
Live in the moment: Sai Baba believed that it is important to live in the present moment and not to dwell on the past or worry about the future. He taught that we should enjoy each moment as it comes and not take life for granted.
Be kind to all living beings: Sai Baba taught that we should be kind to all living beings, including animals. According to him, all creatures are God’s children and should be treated with affection and humanity.
Serve others: Sai Ram instructed that we should serve others, especially those who are less fortunate than ourselves. He enlightened us that by helping others, we are helping God.
Love all, serve all: Shirdi Baba’s most famous teaching was “love all, serve all.” He believed that we should love everyone, regardless of their race, religion, or social status. He educated us that we should serve others selflessly and without expectations.

Sai Baba’s teachings combined elements of Hinduism and Islam. He gave the Hindu name Dwarakamayi to the mosque where he lived, practicing Hindu and Muslim rituals and teaching using words and symbols from both traditions. Some of his well-known sayings are as follows: 

“Be happy with whatever comes your way” 
“Other people’s acts will affect just them. It is only your own deeds that will affect you”
“Peace is impossible for those addicted to lust”
“The life ahead can only be glorious if you learn to live in total harmony with the Lord”
“Life is a mosaic of pleasure and pain – grief is an interval between two moments of joy

Sai Baba of Shirdi taught us the essence of the scriptures of every religion practically by living His life as per the teaching and principles of the scriptures of various religions. Hence if one studies His life heartily than he or she need not study other scriptures. His life was a greatest teaching He left behind for us. His religion was that of Humanity.
 
His main teaching which contains the essence or theme of all other teachings was:
 
"SEE GOD IN EACH AND EVERY CREATURE"
 
The reasons why I called it the main essence of every teaching are:
 
1) When one sees God in each and every being He starts realising the all pervasiveness of the ONE AND ONLY ONE GOD.
2) He does not develop the ill feelings of hatred and jealousness not only towards fellow human beings but also towards other creatures and hence treats them all alike.
3) This leads to the feeling of love and compassion towards entire creation.
4) This also makes us rise above the boundaries of various religions and creates in us a sense of respect for all religions.
 
Saibaba practically taught this doctrine to His devotees by appearing in various forms in front of His devotees. To some He appeared in the form of beggar, to some in the form of cat & dog or to some in the form of untouchable or leper. The main purpose was to make His devotees know that He resides in each and every creature, from the highest of the high to the lowest of the low and hence to develop a sense of respect towards all creatures including animals and to create a feeling  of oneness in His devotees.
 
Hence following the simple doctrine (but yet very difficult to practise) of seeing God in each and every creature makes us automatically follow all the other Teachings (like humility, compassion towards all, helping the poor and downtrodden, serving mankind, politeness towards all, truth and righteousness in conduct etc etc)  of Shirdi Sai Baba and other great saints.
